# chapter 11: associative containers

as with ch9, this will be a non-exhaustive list of main ideas and tips.

## main core ideas
- ordered associative containers are ordered by key and must have a key type that is comparable.
- the unordered versions of associative containers are basically hashing versions.
	- types used as keys in unordered containers must have a defined hashing object and == operator.
- **the keys in associative containers are const.**
- ***pair*** defined in the *utility* header holds two public data members and is used to map keys to values.
	- pair element are value initialized 
- *value_type* for maps are *pair&lt;const key_type, mapped_type&gt;*, for sets are *key_type*.
	- **dereferencing an iterator returns a reference to the associative container's respective *value_type*.**
	- *insert* and *erase* operation type details in Primer.
- **the subscript operator [ ] for a map takes a key as the argument and returns a *mapped_type* lvalue (so we can directly read or overwrite the "value" of the "key-value" pair).**
	- **if the requested key is not already present, a new element is value-initialized and inserted into the map for that key!**
		- different from other containers like [vector](https://github.com/tedklin/back-to-basics/blob/master/cpp/primer/ch-03.md#library-vector-type-33), where subscripting "out of range" is undefined!!!
		- **use the *find* (returns iterator to found key, *== end()* if key not present) member method to access keys/values without changing the map**.
			- *find* also good for sets.
			- *count* (returns count of input key) for multimaps/multisets.

## misc conventions and tips
- stick with ordered versions for now (the potential increase in performance for unordered versions actually depends on not-so-obvious factors).
