# chapter 4: expressions

## new core ideas
- **overloaded operators**
	- classes can define the meaning of operators, including the type of its operand(s) and the result
		- the operators we used with strings, vectors, and iterators are examples of overloaded operators
	- the number of operands and precedence/associativity cannot be changed
- **lvalues vs rvalues**
	- roughly speaking, when we use an object as an rvalue, we use the object's value (its contents).
	- when we use an object as an lvalue, we use the object's identity (its location in memory).
	- **we can generally use an lvalue when an rvalue is required (the object's contents are used), but not the other way around.**
		- exception: [rvalue references]()
	- [easier to understand explanation here](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/3601602/what-are-rvalues-lvalues-xvalues-glvalues-and-prvalues)
	- [up-to-date technical reference here](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/value_category)
- precedence and associativity
	- precedence dictates how operators are grouped and which groups have priority.
	- associativity dictates how operands with the same precedence are evaluated. (for example, +/- goes left to right)
- order of evaluation
	- the order in which operands are evaluated is largely unspecified and can lead to undefined behavior.
		- exceptions: &&; ||; *conditional* ( ? : ) ; *comma* ,
	- **serious bug if both operands refer/point to the same object and one of the operands changes that object.**	
		- watch out for increments and decrements

#### type conversions
- **implicit conversions** 
	- arithmetic types are defined to preserve precision if possible (convert to the widest type).
		- details in Primer
	- in initializations, the intializer is converted to the type of the variable.
	- in assignments, the right-hand operand is converted to the type of the left-hand operand.
	- in conditions, non*bool* expressions are converted to *bool*.
	- arrays are automatically converted to pointers to the first element in the array
	- a pointer / reference to *T* can be converted into a pointer / reference to *const T*.
		- the reverse conversion does not exist.
		- [see top-level vs low-level const](https://github.com/tedklin/pseudoblog/blob/master/cpp_notebook/primer/ch-02.md#const-qualifier-24)
	- [class types can define implicit conversions](https://github.com/tedklin/pseudoblog/blob/master/cpp_notebook/primer/ch-07.md#additional-class-features)
		- for example, the iostream library defines a conversion from *istream* to *bool* (ch1).
- **explicit conversions (casts)**
	- **although necessary at times, casts are inherently dangerous!!!**
	- *static_cast* can request any well-defined type conversions (excluding low-level const conversions).
		- useful for things like requesting floating point arithmetic on objects defined as integral.
	- *const_cast* "casts away" a low-level const, removing the compiler's write restriction.
		- however, using a const_cast to write to a const object is undefined!
		- might be used in the context of overloaded functions (6.4), but **core guidelines say don't use const_cast at all and find another way around your problem!**
	- avoid *reinterpret_cast* and old style casts with parentheses.

#### specific operators

- (mostly same as other languages, refer to documentation and precedence table in Primer)
- modulus operator
	- works on integral types only
	- m%(-n) == m%n 
	- (-m)%n == -(m%n)
- assignment
	- unlike other binary operators, assignment is right associative
		- ival = jval = 0 becomes ival = (jval = 0), assuming type can be converted
	- assignment returns its left-hand operand (an lvalue)
		- commonly used in conditions for readability
		- need parentheses because assignments have low precedence
- increment / decrement
	- prefix returns the object itself as an lvalue (yielding the changed result)
	- postfix returns a copy of the object's original value as an rvalue
		- postfix is used when we want to use the current value of a variable and increment it in a single compound expression.
			- commonly used &ast;pointer++ in while loops is equivalent to &ast;(pointer++), which means increment pointer and dereference the original value of pointer.
- *sizeof* returns the size, in bytes, of an expression or a type name
	- it does not evaluate its operand (it doesn't need to fetch something to know its size)
		- it doesn't matter to *sizeof* if a dereferenced invalid pointer is given as an argument, it just looks at the size of the type to which the pointer points
	- *sizeof* an array is the size of the entire array
		- *sizeof(array)/sizeof(&ast;array)* gives the number of elements in an array (not always safe)
- the *comma operator* evaluates and discards left-hand expression, then evaluates and returns value of right-hand expression
	- commonly used in traditional for loops to do two things in the third statement


## misc conventions and tips
- when in doubt, use parenthesis to force grouping.
- boolean literals (true, false) should only be used with objects of type *bool*.
	- to check if something like a pointer is nonzero, put the pointer directly in the conditional.
- prefer prefix version of increment / decrement


## things to follow up on