# chapter 7: classes

## member functions

### new core ideas
- declaration and definition of functions in / related to a class:
	- member functions must be declared inside the class body.
	- member functions may be defined inside or outside the class body.
		- conventionally defined (outside) in the source file corresponding to the header with the class body.
	- *nonmember* functions that are conceptually part of the interface of a class are declared and defined outside the class body.
		- conventionally declared in the same header as the class body and defined in the corresponding source file.
	- functions defined in the class are automatically [*inline*](https://github.com/tedklin/pseudoblog/blob/master/cpp_notebook/primer/ch-06.md#other-features-65).
- [**important info about scope**](#class-scope)
- ***this***
	- (non[static](#static-class-members)) member functions are called on behalf of an object.
	- (nonstatic) member functions access the object on which they were called through an implicit const pointer (to the object) named *this*.
		- inside the member function, we can refer directly to the members of the object on which the function was called.
			- *memberName* is equivalent to an implicit *this->memberName*
	- we can also return a dereferenced *this* to return the object as a whole from a member function.
		- recall from ch6, **use a reference function-return-type to return the object (in this case, *&ast;this*) as an lvalue.** (returns the object itself, not a temporary copy of the object)
			- doing this allows us to chain calls (i.e. multiple dot operators) to **nonconst** member functions on the same object.
			- a const member function that returns **this* as a reference should have a return type that is reference to const. 
				- these can't be chained with other "action" functions, as they would return the object with an added const restriction.
- ***const* member functions**
	- const member functions have the keyword *const* following the parameter list in the function declaration.
	- changes *this* from the default *const pointer to nonconst* to a *const pointer to const*.
		- the body of a const member function is restricted from changing the object on which it is called.
		- a const object (and references/pointers to const objects) may only call const member functions.
- **by default, copying a class object copies each member of that object.**
	- see ch13 for how to define copy, assignment, and destruction for objects of a class type.

### misc conventions and tips
- **use const member functions where possible to increase flexibility and safety.**
- in practice, well designed C++ programs tend to have lots of small functions that are called to do the "real work" of some other set of functions.
- terminology review: a class *definition* includes all of its member functions' *declarations*. a member function's *definition* does not need to appear in a class *definition* (and usually(?) appears in a separate source file).
	- a member function whose definition appears in its class's definition is an *inline* function.

## constructors

### new core ideas
- constructors are special member functions.
- classes control object initializers by defining one or more (overloaded) constructors.
- the job of a constructor is to initialize the data members of a class object.
	- when we create a const object of a class type, the object does not assume its "constness" until after the constructor completes the object's intialization.
- **default constructor**
	- the default constructor of a class controls [default initialization *and* value initialization](https://github.com/tedklin/pseudoblog/blob/master/cpp_notebook/primer/ch-02.md#variables-22) on objects of the class-type.
	- a default constructor takes no arguments (usually has no parameters).
		- a constructor that supplies default arguments for all its parameters also defines the default constructor.
	- ***synthesized* default constructor**
		- initializes members with **in-class initializers** or (if in-class initializers don't exist) performs **default intialization** on members.
		- **synthesized default constructors are only used if:**
			- a class does not explicitly define **any** constructor at all, in which case the compiler implicitly defines the default constructor as a synthesized default constructor.
			- a class requests the compiler to use the synthesized default constructor by explicitly declaring or defining its default constructor with ***= default*** after the parameter list. (C++11)
				- if we **want** to use the synthesized default constructor with other (non-default) constructors, we **must** do this.
- defining a constructor outside the class body follows the rules for any member function defined outside.
- ***constructor initializer list*** 
	- is part of a constructor's **definition**.
	- is the first thing executed in a constructor.
	- specifies initial values for and initializes one or more data members of the object being created.
		- order of initialization isn't based on the order of appearance in the constructor initializer list, but rather the order in which the members appear in the class definition.
	- when any data member is **omitted** from the constructor initializer list, the data member is implicitly initialized using the same process as the synthesized default constructor (in-class initializer or, if in-class initializer doesn't exist, default initialization).
		- data members can technically then be *assigned* (overriding the in-class or default initialization) in the body of a constructor.
			- this doesn't work for members that are references, are *const*, or are of a class-type that does not have a default constructor, so these types **must** be initialized in the constructor intializer list!
				- recall references and const cannot be assigned after initialization.
~~~
class SalesData {
public:
	// default constructor requests synthesized default constructor
	SalesData() = default;
	
	// (inline) constructor definition with constructor initializer list.
	// empty body only because there's no further work
	SalesData(unsigned new_sold, double price):
		units_sold_(new_sold), revenue_(price*new_sold) { }

private:
	// in-class initializers for members
	unsigned units_sold_ = 0;
	double revenue_ = 0;
	
	// id_ ends up default-initialized
	// (which is only ok because we know strings default initialize to empty)
	std::string id_;
}	
~~~

- ***delegating constructors***
	- we can put another previously declared constructor A inside constructor B's constructor initializer list to "delegate" a part of or all of B's work to A.
		- delegating constructors can only have a single entry that is the other constructor.
~~~
// all constructors are implicitly inline in this case (bad practice? idk)
class SalesData {
public:
	// nondelegating constructor A
	SalesData(std::string id, unsigned new_sold, double price):
		units_sold_(new_sold), revenue_(price*new_sold), id_(id) {
		// this specific constructor can specify additional commands like do a backflip
	}
	
	// default constructor as a delegating constructor (delegates work to A).
	// this unnecessarily overrides the in-class initializers below (bad practice!)
	// but this is just an example
	SalesData(): 
		SalesData("", 0, 0) { 
		// initializes members according to constructor A
		// automatically does a backflip as specified in constructor A
		
		// this specific constructor can specify further commands like do a pushup
	}
	
	// other constructor as a delegating constructor (delegates work to A)
	SalesData(std::string id): 
		SalesData(id, 0, 0) {
		// initializes members according to constructor A
		// automatically does a backflip as specified in constructor A
		
		// this specific constructor can specify further commands like do a 360 windmill.
	}

private:
	// members
	unsigned units_sold_ = 0; // in-class initializer
	double revenue_ = 0; // in-class initializer
	std::string id_;
}
~~~


### misc conventions and tips
- **routinely use constructor initializer lists!**
	- **make it a habit to order the list in the order it executes** (the order of variable declaration in the class definition).
		- even having done that, **avoid using members to initialize other members in constructor initializer lists**, as it increases the possibility of future error. (there are a lot of situations where your variable declarations might change order in the future without you knowing / realizing.)
- **stick with in-class initializers to specify default values for (non[static](#static-class-members)) data members of class type (and built-in types).** (C++11)
	- only use default arguments in constructors if absolutely necessary.
- **it is almost always right to explicitly provide a default constructor if other constructors are being defined.**
- **rely on / request the synthesized default constructor only if you know it does the right thing.**
	- when all built-in and compound-type data members have in-class initializers, members of other class-types have in-class intializers or <ins>known</ins> default constructors, etc.
- constructors should usually not override in-class initializers except to provide a different initial value.
- **declare <ins>single-argument</ins> constructors with the keyword *explicit* to suppress [implicit class-type conversions](#additional-class-features)!**

## access control and encapsulation

### new core ideas
- ***access specifiers*** (*public:* and *private:*) enforce encapsulation.
	- each access specifier specifies the access level of the members that come after it (until the next access specifier or the end of the body).
- ***class*** vs ***struct*** keywords
	- the only difference is the default (first implicit) access level (public for struct and private for class)
- **a class can allow another outside class or function to access its nonpublic members by making that class or function a *friend*.**
- **(nonmember) function friendship**
	- a class makes a function its friend by including a declaration for that function preceded by the keyword *friend* inside the class body.
	- friend declarations do not automatically carry accross overloaded functions of the same name.
	- friend functions (nonmember and member) don't become members of the class "granting friendship".
		- friend declarations are **unaffected by access control** and can appear **anywhere** in a class body.
	- **friend declarations only specify access and do not represent an actual general declaration.**
		- actual general declarations (and definitions) usually follow the same convention as other ["nonmember functions that are conceptually part of the interface of a class"](#member-functions).
- **class friendship**
	- a class makes a class its friend the same way it does with functions (declaration with *friend* prefix)
	- class A declaring class B as a friend ("granting friendship to class B") grants class B's member functions access to all of the members of an object of type A.
		- friendship is not transitive (the friends of class B don't have special access to class A).
	- **classes and nonmember functions need not have been declared before they are used in a friend declaration.**
		- when a name first appears in a friend declaration, they are implicitly assumed to be a part of the surrounding scope.
		- however, (as stated above) friend declarations do not constitute an actual declaration.
	- **class member function friendship**
		- class A can also specify which specific class B member function has special access by declaring only that member function as a friend (with the appropriate *ClassBName::* scope prefix).
			- the definition of class B (with the declaration of the member function to be friended by class A) must come before the definition of class A (with the friend declaration for the member function in class B), which in turn must come before the definition of the member function of class B (that has special access to class A).


### misc conventions and tips
- as a matter of style, use *struct* for classes that contain only public data members and use *class* for everything else.
- in general, *public* is related to interfacing and *private* is related to implementation.
- group friend declarations together in a class body (i think i personally prefer at the end).

## additional class features

### new core ideas
- **type members** (local [type aliases](https://github.com/tedklin/pseudoblog/blob/master/cpp_notebook/primer/ch-02.md#dealing-with-types-25)) can be defined by a class.
	- subject to the same access controls as any other member (public indicates that we want external users to use that type name).
	- usually defined at the beginning of a class definition (we can only use type aliases after they're defined).
- ***mutable* data members** (specified by a *mutable* prefix keyword) are never const, even when they are members of a const object.
	- const member functions may (only) change mutable members.
- **forward declarations**
	- a declaration of a class without a definition.
		- *class ClassName;*
	- before a definition is seen by the program, a type that is only declared is an ***incomplete type***.
		- functionality for incomplete types is limited. we can only:
			- define (but not access) pointers and references to incomplete types.
			- declare (but not define) functions that use incomplete types as a parameter/return type.
		- this is also why **a class can't have data members of its own type, but can have pointers and references to its own type.**
- **implicit class-type conversions (*bad!*)**
	- for any given class, every constructor that can be called with a single argument defines an implicit conversion from the single argument's type *to* the class type.
		- for example, for a given class A with one constructor with a single argument of type std::vector and another constructor with a single argument of type std::string, there are implicit conversions from std::vector and std::string to class type A.
		- this implicit conversion means we can use an object of the type of the argument (std::string or std::vector) where an object of the class type A is actually expected.
			- when that happens, the compiler automatically generates a *temporary* object of the class-type A to pass in as the std::string or std::vector.
				- this could be a very hard bug to catch!
	- **bottom line (at least for now as a beginner): do not allow implicit class-type conversions!!!**
		- **declare <ins>single-argument</ins> constructors with the prefix keyword *explicit* to suppress implicit conversions.**
			- side-effects: explicit constructors can only be used with [direct initialization (not copy initialization with an = sign)](https://github.com/tedklin/pseudoblog/blob/master/cpp_notebook/primer/ch-02.md#variables-22), and the compiler will not use this constructor in an automatic conversion (users will have to [explicitly cast](https://github.com/tedklin/pseudoblog/blob/master/cpp_notebook/primer/ch-04.md#type-conversions) it to convert it).
- aggregate classes and literal classes
	- put off for now

### misc conventions and tips
- *mutable* is useful for maintaining const-correctness by avoiding other "hack" fixes like const_cast or removing explicit const qualifiers all together.
- [Google's C++ style guide](https://google.github.io/styleguide/cppguide.html#Implicit_Conversions) also does not allow implicit class-type conversions, so i think i'm safe just using *explicit* for all single-argument constructors for now.

## class scope

### new core ideas
- **every class defines its own new scope.**
	- the name of a member defined outside the class body must include a scope prefix (***ClassName::***) indicating the class it belongs to.
		- constructors defined outside would have the form *ClassName::ClassName*
		- once the compiler sees the prefix with the scope operator in a function name, the rest of the function definition is interpreted as being inside the scope of the class (we can access other members normally without extra qualifications).
			- **this includes the parameter list but excludes the return type**, which could be a [type member](#additional-class-features).
- member function **definitions** are processed **after** the compiler processes **all** of the **declarations** in the class.
- **name lookup in class member *declarations*:**
	- names *used* in declarations must be seen before they are used.
	- when a declaration inside a class *uses* a name (i.e. a type), the compiler first looks inside the class (before / above the name usage) for the declaration *for* that name.
		- if it doesn't find it, it then looks for a declaration for that name in the enclosing scope(s).
	- **definitions of type names should appear at the beginning of a class**, so any member declaration that uses that type will be seen after the type name has already been defined.
- **name lookup inside class member *definitions*:**
	- order:
		1. first, look for a declaration of the name inside the member function definition itself (this includes both the block and the parameters).
			- remember the closest local declaration *hides* all other declarations.
		2. if not found, look for the name declaration inside the class of the member function (all members of the class are considered).
		3. if still not found, look for the name declaration before (above) the member function definition (in the outer scope).
	- to override this lookup order (if you want to access a name that's been *hidden* by a "closer" declaration), use the scope operator.
		- *ClassName::* can access a hidden member variable and *::* by itself can access a hidden name from the outer scope.
		- **you shouldn't need to override anything if you choose names that won't hide each other when you don't want them to.**


## static class members

### new core ideas
- static members are associated with the class itself instead of individual objects of the class type.
	- prefix keyword ***static*** in the declaration of the member inside the class body.
	- affected by access control like other members.
- static member functions
	- static member function definitions outside the class body should not have the *static* keyword (keyword only in the declaration inside the class body)!
	- static member functions do not have a *this* pointer and can't be a const member function.
- static data members are not initialized by any constructor (including synthesized default).
	- **we must define (and initialize) each static data member outside the class body.**
		- exceptions: static const integral types and static *constexpr* of literal type, which must be in-class initialized with a constant expression initializer.
			- these should still be defined outside the class definition (in the source file?) to avoid unobvious scope errors.
	- a static data member can have the same type as the class type of which it is a member ([incomplete type](#additional-class-features)).
- we can access a class's static members directly through the scope operator.
	- we can also use an object, reference, or pointer of the class type to access static members.
	- other member functions of the class can use the class's static members directly without the scope prefix (see [class scope](#class-scope)).
	
### misc conventions and tips
- put the definition of static data members in the same file that contains the definitions of the class noninline member functions (source file).


## creating class objects
- **when creating an object of class-type, don't confuse an object definition with a function declaration!**
	- *MyClass obj();* declares a MyClass-returning function with no parameters.
	- *MyClass obj;* creates a default-initialized object of type MyClass.
	- *MyClass obj(val1, val2, val3);* creates an object of type MyClass that's initialized with the appropriate constructor.
		- we can tell this isn't a function declaration because the parentheses enclose arguments instead of parameters (which would need types).
- recall [forms of initialization](https://github.com/tedklin/pseudoblog/blob/master/cpp_notebook/primer/ch-02.md#variables-22) (use direct!)

## things to follow up on
