# chapter 6: functions

## basics (6.1)

### new core ideas
- function call
	- execution of a function begins with the (implicit) definition and initialization of its parameters (listed in the function definition) from arguments the caller passes in.
		- the type of each argument must match the corresponding parameter in the same way that the type of any initializer must match the type of the object it initializes.
			- the type of the arguments we pass in must be convertible (and will be converted) to the type of the parameter, just like in regular initialization.
	- the return type cannot be an array type or a function type, but can be a pointer to an array or function (see below).
- scope and lifetime
	- the ***scope*** of a name is the part of the program's text in which that name is visible.
	- the ***lifetime*** of an object is the time during the program's execution that the object exists.
- local objects
	- are parameters and variables defined inside a function body.
	- ordinary local objects are created when the function's control path passes through the variable definition and destroyed when control passes through the end of the block in which the variable is defined.
		- aka ***automatic objects***
		- default initialized if no initializer (to undefined if built-in type).
		- parameters are also automatic objects.
	- a ***local static object*** (a local variable with keyword *static*) persists until the program terminates.
		- initialized *before* the first time execution passes through the object's definition.
		- [value initialized](https://github.com/tedklin/pseudoblog/blob/master/cpp_notebook/primer/ch-02.md#variables-22) if no initializer.
		- subsequent calls ignore(?) the initialization statement because the variable already exists (initialization is not assignment!).
~~~
size_t count_calls() {
	static size_t ctr = 0;
	return ++ctr;
}

int main() {
	// prints the numbers from 1 through 10 inclusive
	for (size_t i = 0; i != 10; ++i) {
		cout << count_calls() << '\n';
	}
	return 0;
}
~~~

- function declarations
	- aka ***function prototype***
	- a function may only be defined once but can be declared multiple times (like variables)
	- a function declaration is just like a function definition except the function body is replaced with a semicolon
		- parameter names are not required, but can help users of the function understand what the function does.
	- **functions should be declared in header files and defined in source files.**
		- the source file that defines a function should #include the header that declares the function.
		- these files can be compiled separately and linked.


### misc conventions and tips
- [compiling and linking multiple files with g++](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/3202136/using-g-to-compile-multiple-cpp-and-h-files)

## argument passing (6.2)

### new core ideas
- **parameter initialization works the same way as variable intialization!**
- **passing arguments by value**
	- when we initialize a *nonreference*-type variable, the value of the initializer is **copied**.
		- changes made to the variable inside the function have no effect on the initializer.
	- pointers are also copied and can be used normally with address-type arguments (but generally use pass by reference instead).
- **passing arguments by reference**
	- reference parameters allow a function to change the value of corresponding arguments.
	- using reference parameters avoids inefficient large copies.
		- some classes cannot be copied at all and require the use of reference parameters.
	- references (and pointers) can be used to conceptually "return" multiple values from a function.
- **const parameters and arguments**
	- recall [top-level / low-level const rules](https://github.com/tedklin/pseudoblog/blob/master/cpp_notebook/primer/ch-02.md#const-qualifier-24).
	- **reference parameters that are not changed inside a function should be *references to const*.**
		- using a [plain reference](https://github.com/tedklin/pseudoblog/blob/master/cpp_notebook/primer/ch-02.md#compound-types-23) type parameter instead not only misleads the function caller, but also greatly limits the type of arguments that can be passed in! (can't pass const, literal, or any object that requires conversion)
- array parameters
	- recall from ch3 that we cannot "copy" an array, and when we use an array it usually decays into a pointer.
		- [run-down of what actually happens when we pass arrays into functions (array-to-pointer decay), as well as how to pass arrays by reference](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/1461432/what-is-array-to-pointer-decay)
		-  when we aren't sure of size or want size flexibility, we can add an additional parameter representing size.
			- or just get rid of the array parameter and pass in pointers returned by *begin(myArray)* and *end(myArray)* from the *iterator* library header (standard library convention).
			- or use templates (ch16)
- passing arguments to main
	- main can take two optional parameters:
		- *int argc* representing the number of command-line arguments (program arguments + 1)
		- *char &ast;&ast;argv* representing an array of pointers to C-style character strings storing the command-line arguments.
			- the first element (index 0) in *argv* points to the name of the program or the empty string, the rest point to the program CL arguments.
- functions with varying number of parameters, all of the same type
	- we can pass a library template type called ***initializer_list*** defined in the library header of the same name.
		- elements in an initializer_list are always const.
		- copying or assigning initializer_list's to each other results in both the original and the copy sharing the elements.
		- initializer_list has standard member functions size(), begin(), and end().
	- we must use curly braces around the argument sequence of values we pass into an initializer_list parameter.
	- functions with an initializer_list parameter can still have other parameters.
	- we can use a range-for on initializer_list (as with all types that have *begin* and *end* iterators).

### misc conventions and tips
- C programmers might often use pointer parameters to access objects outside a function. C++ programmers generally use reference parameters instead.
- [pass by reference to const vs pass by value](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/270408/is-it-better-in-c-to-pass-by-value-or-pass-by-constant-reference)
- see ch16 for functions with parameters whose type might vary (variadic templates).


## *return* (6.3)

### new core ideas
- empty returns can be used in void functions to exit the function at an intermediate point.
- non-void functions must return a value that is implicitly convertible to the function return type.
- values are returned in exactly the same way variables and parameters are initialized.
	- return value is used to initialize a temporary at the call site, and that temporary is the result of the function call.
- functions can have a return type of a reference/pointer to something.
	- **never return a reference or pointer to a local object.**
	- also never directly return a literal when the function has a return type of a reference.
		- recall local object *lifetime*!
- **reference returns are lvalues, other return types yield rvalues**
	- lvalue return gives the object itself, rvalue return essentially gives a temporary copy.
	- we can assign to the result of a function that returns a reference to nonconst!
- we can return a braced list of values (list-initialization) in functions with appropriate return types (like vector)
- we cannot return an array directly, but we can return a pointer or a reference to an array.
	- can be complicated, so im putting off trying to fully understand this for now.

### misc conventions and tips
- *csdtlib* defines two machine-independent preprocessor variables for the *main* function to indicate an exit success or failure.

## overloaded functions (6.4)

### new core ideas
- functions that have the same name and appear in the same scope but have different parameter lists are called overloaded functions.
	- the presence of a top-level const in the parameter type is ignored and does not make a function different as to be overloaded.
		- low-level const in the parameter type is not ignored and makes a difference.
- *const_cast* with overloaded functions (refer to Primer)
- names do not overload across scopes
	- recall that if we declare a name in an inner scope, that name hides uses of that name declared in an outer scope.
	- names that are hidden are not even considered by the compiler.
	- **name lookup happens before type checking in C++**

### misc conventions and tips
- don't overload function names if doing so removes clarity about what the function does.


## other features (6.5)

### new core ideas
- **default arguments** can be specified as initializers for parameters.
	- if a parameter has a default argument, all the parameters that follow must also have default arguments.
	- the default argument(s) are used when the argument(s) during a call to a function are completely omitted.
		- callers can only omit trailing (right-side) arguments.
	- default arguments should be specified with the function declaration in an appropriate header.
	- names used as default arguments are resolved in the scope of the function declaration and evaluated at the time of the call.
		- local variables may not be used as a default argument.
- ***inline* functions** avoid function call overhead.
	- specifying the *inline* keyword before the function return type will make the request to the compiler.
	- meant to optimize small, straight-line functions that are called frequently.
- ***constexpr* functions** are implicitly-*inline* functions that can be used in a [constant expression](https://github.com/tedklin/pseudoblog/blob/master/cpp_notebook/primer/ch-02.md#const-qualifier-24).
	- the return type and the type of each parameter must be a literal type (arithmetic types, references, and pointers).
	- the function must contain exactly one return statement. 
		- other statements must generate no actions at runtime (i.e. type aliases).
	- **constexpr functions will only return a constant expression if its argument is a constant expression**, otherwise it just acts as a normal function.
- debugging aids
	- the ***assert*** preprocessor macro in the *cassert* header terminates a program if the expression it receives is false (i.e., zero).
		- often used for checking against conditions that can "never" happen to make programs easier to debug.
		- when the preprocessor variable ***NDEBUG*** is defined, *assert* does nothing.
			- most compilers provide a command line option to do this as well.
	- the C++ compiler defines a variable named \_\_func\_\_ in every function that can be used to print the name of the function.
	- the preprocessor defines printable variables \_\_FILE\_\_; \_\_LINE\_\_; \_\_TIME\_\_; \_\_DATE\_\_; as well.

### misc conventions and tips
- inline and constexpr functions may be defined multiple times, but all definitions must match exactly.
	- **put inline and constexpr functions in header files!**
- don't define your own functions named assert!


## function matching (6.6)

### new core ideas
- aka *overload resolution*
- when a function is called, the compiler narrows down from functions with the same name in the closest scope (*candidate functions*) to functions that have the same number of parameters and whose arguments can be convertible into corresponding parameter type (*viable functions*).
	- details in Primer on how a "best match" is determined from the viable functions.

### misc conventions and tips
- well-designed systems avoid overloading functions with parameters that are too closely related.


## pointers to functions (6.7)

### new core ideas
- a function's type is determined by its return type and the types of its parameters
~~~
// function declaration
bool lengthCompare (const string &, const string &);

// declaration of pf, which is a pointer to a function with the above type
bool (*pf)(const string &, const string &);
~~~
- when we use the name of a function, the function is automatically converted to a pointer.
	- address-of and dereference operators are unnecessary when assigning / using a pointer to a function.
- details in Primer on using pointers to functions as parameter and return types.

### misc conventions and tips
- hi

## things to follow up on