# chapter 5: statements

## new core ideas
- null statements for when the language requires a statement but program logic does not (i.e. some loops).
- blocks denoted by brackets and **block scope**
	- empty block is equivalent to null statement.

#### control structures
(most skimmed)

- if / else
	- *dangling else* problem
- switch
	- case labels must be integral constant expressions.
	- falling through case statements with break ommisions
	- default label
	- variable initializations inside switch body
- while
	- can define variables in the condition.
	- variables defined in a while condition or while body are created and destroyed on each iteration.
- do-while
	- need semicolon after parenthesized while condition.
	- can't define variables in the condition.
- traditional for
	- we can have multiple definitions (with the same base type using the comma operator) in the init-statement.
		- useful when the index and the loop control are different variables.
	- we can use null statements for any of the three header statements.
- **range for** (C++11)
	- the right side of the header must be an expression that represents a sequence (braced initializer list, array, or any type that has *begin()* and *end()* members that return iterators, like vectors and strings).
	- it must be possible to convert each element of the given sequence to the type of the iterating variable (declared on the left side of the header).
		- use auto type specifier!
		- loop variable must be a reference type if we want to write to the elements in the sequence.
		- [**general summary of how to declare variable in range for loops**](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/15176104/c11-range-based-loop-get-item-by-value-or-reference-to-const)
	- on each iteration, the control variable is defined and intialized by the next value in the sequence.
	- we can't add elements to a container in a range for because the loop control relies on a cached *end()* iterator.
- jump statements
	- *break* terminates the nearest enclosing iteration or switch statement.
	- *continue* terminates the current iteration of the nearest enclosing loop and immediately begins the next iteration.
	- avoid *goto* lol


#### intro to exception handling
- *throw* can be used with a standard library exception type to raise an exception
- *try-catch* handles exceptions
	- catch clause(s) include exception declaration.
	- library exception classes have a member function ***what()*** that return a C-style character string (string literal) with info about the exception. 
- standard library exception types
	- the ***stdexcept*** header defines several general-purpose exception classes like ***runtime_error***.
		- there are also exception types defined in the *new* and *type_info* headers, covered in ch12 and ch19.
	- most exception types are direct initialized with a string / string literal that is used by the programmer to provide additional error messaging.
		- for these types, the *what()* member returns the message the exception was initialized with.
- more on exception handling in ch18.

## misc conventions and tips
- comment null statements, *break* omissions to let readers know it's intentional,
- writing robust *exception-safe code* that "cleans up" properly when an exception occurs isn't covered completely in Primer.

## things to follow up on