# chapter 3: strings, vectors, and arrays

## namespace *using* declarations (3.1)

### new core ideas
- the **scope operator ::** says that the compiler should look in the scope (namespace) of the left-hand operand for the name of the right-hand operatand
- a ***using*** declaration lets us use a name from a namespace without qualifying the name with *(namespace)::* prefix
	- a separate *using* declaration is required for each name

~~~
#include <iostream>
#include <string>
using std::cin; using std::cout;
using std::string;
int main() {
	string i;
	cin >> i; // cin is a synonym for std::cin
	cout << i << '\n'; // cout is a synonym for std::cout
	return 0;
}
~~~

### misc conventions and tips
- **code in headers should not use *using* declarations**
	- recall contents of a header are copied into the including programs text. if a header has a *using* declaration, then every program that includes that header gets that same *using* declaration.


## library *string* type (3.2)

### new core ideas
- string initialization
	- *default initialize* to empty string (covered before in ch2).
	- *copy initialize* copies the initializer on the right-hand side of an = sign. this can be used with a single initializer.
	- *direct initialize* omits the = sign and can be used with initializers that consist of more than one value.
~~~
// how i initialize a string (refer to Primer for complete list)
string s1; // default initialization to the empty string
string s2 = s1; // s2 is a copy of s1 (copy initialized)
string s3 = "value"; // s3 is a copy of the string literal (copy initialized)
string s4(n, 'c'); // initialize s4 with n copies of the character 'c' (direct initialized)
~~~

- **classes can define how objects are created/initialized, operations that are called by name, and what various operator symbols (<<, +, etc.) mean when applied to objects of the class' type.**
~~~
// string operations
// 's' is string, 'os' is output stream, 'is' is input stream
// positions are zero-indexed

os << s // writes s onto os, returns os
is >> s // reads whitespace-separated string from is into s, returns is
getline(is, s) // reads a line of input from is into s (not including the newline), returns is.
s.empty() // returns true if s is empty, otherwise returns false
s.size() // returns the (unsigned size_type) number of characters in s
s[n] // returns a reference to the char at position (unsigned size_type) n in s.
s1 + s2 // returns a string that is the concatenation of s1 and s2
s1 = s2 // replaces characters in s1 with a copy of s2

// the strings s1 and s2 are equal if they contain the same characters.
// equality is case sensitive. 
// comparisons use case-senstive dictionary ordering.
s1 == s2 // !=, <, <=, >, >=
~~~

- concatenation
	- the string library lets us convert both character literals and character string literals to strings (so we can automatically concatenate them).
	- at least one operand to each + operator must be of *string* type.
	- **string literals are not of type *string* from the C++ standard library.**
~~~
// examples of legal and illegal concatenation
string s4 = s1 + ", " + s2 + '\n'; // ok
string s5 = "hello" + ", " + s2; // error: no string operand for first + operator
string s6 = s1 + ", " + "world"; // ok, right equivalent to (s1 + ", ") + "world"
~~~

- analyzing the characters in a string
	- *cctype* library has functions for interpreting characters and changing characteristics like upper/lowercase
	- **range-based *for* loop** is good for processing every character in a string. (C++11)
		- the *auto* type specifier is useful here.
~~~
// example of using range for and the cctype library function ispunct
string s("hello world!!!");
decltype(s.size()) punct_cnt = 0;
for (auto c : s) {
	if (ispunct(c))
		++punct_cnt;
}
cout << punct_cnt << '\n';
~~~

- changing the characters in a non*const* string
	- **to change the value of the characters in string, we must define the loop variable as a reference type.**
~~~
// example of changing the characters in a string by reference
string s("hello world!!!");
for (auto &c : s)
	c = toupper(c); // cctype function returns uppercase version of argument
cout << punct_cnt << '\n';
~~~

- the **subscript operator [ ]** takes a *string::size_type* (unsigned) value that denotes the zero-indexed position of the character we want to access and returns a reference to that character.
	- **the result of using an index out of range is undefined.**
		- **valid range is >=0 && < size()**
		- **subscripting an empty string is undefined.**
	- **any time we use a subscript, we must ensure that there is a value at the given location.**
		- in this use case, we would check that the string isn't empty before using the [ ] operator.

### misc conventions and tips
- direct initialize is preferred when initializing objects with multiple values (parameters?)
- **don't use signed *int*s in subscript operators *[ ]* or expressions that use *size()*.**
	- size() returns a *string::size_type* value.
	- use auto to get the type if necessary, but remember it's unsigned!
- the C++ library incorporates the C library. the C++ version of C library headers are c*name* (remove the .h suffix and precede the name with the letter 'c').
	- when we include *cctype*, we are actually including the C++ version of the C library header *ctype.h*. 
	- using the c*name* form in C++ lets us access the C library header's namespace through *std*.
- [**general summary of how to declare types in ranged for loops**](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/15176104/c11-range-based-loop-get-item-by-value-or-reference-to-const)


## library *vector* type (3.3)

### new core ideas
- a ***vector*** is a *class template*
	- templates are not themselves classes or functions.
	- to specify which actual class to instantiate from a template, we supply additional information inside angle brackets following the template's name.
- a vector is a container containing other objects all of the same type.
	- we specify the type of the objects a vector will hold inside angle brackets.
~~~
vector<int> ivec; // ivec holds objects of type int
vector<vector<string>> // vector whose elements are vectors containing strings
~~~

- vector initialization
	- default initialize to an empty vector of the specified type.
		- the most common way of using vector is to define an empty vector to which elements are added as their values become known at runtime.
	- copy elements from another vector of the same type (using either direct or copy initialization like with strings)
	- list initialize using { } curly braces (direct or copy initialization)
	- direct initialize from a specified number of elements (with the option of providing a default initial value for all elements)
~~~
// how i initialize a vector (refer to Primer for complete list)
vector <T> v1; // default initialize empty vector of type T
vector<T> v2 = v1; // v2 has a copy of each element in v1
vector<T> v3(n, val); // v3 has n elements each with value val
vector<T> v4(n); // v4 has n elements each with type T's default-initializing value
vector<T> v5 = {a, b, c} // v5 is list-initialized
~~~


### misc conventions and tips
- [direct initializers are generally more permissible, but can lead to the "most vexing parse" disambiguity problem.](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/direct_initialization)
	- for now stick with copy initialization and only use direct initialization when necessary.
- be careful about curly braces vs parentheses!
	- also, if we use braces, but there is no way to use the initializers to list initialize the object, then those values will be used to construct the object (as if they were inside parentheses).


## things to follow up on
- my program compiles and runs without the #include directive for cctype. is it necessary/good practice to include it anyways?
