# chapter 13: copy control

## copy, assign, destroy (13.1)

### main core ideas
- a constructor is the ***copy constructor*** if its first parameter is a **reference to its class-type** and any additional parameters have default values.
	- the parameter is usually a reference to const.
	- usually not *explicit* (copy constructor is often used implicitly).
	- if not manually defined, the copy constructor is **always** synthesized! (as opposed to [synthesized default constructors](https://github.com/tedklin/pseudoblog/blob/master/cpp_notebook/primer/ch-07.md#constructors))
		- the synthesized copy constructor performs (nonstatic) memberwise copying (using each member's respective copy constructor).
	- copy constructors are used in [copy initialization](https://github.com/tedklin/pseudoblog/blob/master/cpp_notebook/primer/ch-02.md#variables-22) (and direct initialization?).
~~~
// example copy constructor declaration
class Foo {
	Foo(const Foo& foo);
};
~~~

- the ***copy-assignment operator*** is a function overload of the = operator.
	- for consistency purposes, assignment operators ordinarily should return a reference to their left-hand operand (return *\*this*).
	- needs to take into account self-assignment.
	- if not manually defined, the copy-assignment operator is **always** synthesized.
		- the synthesized version performs (nonstatic) memberwise assignment (using each member's respective copy-assignment operator).
		- also returns a reference to its left-hand operand.
~~~
// example copy-assignment operator overload declaration
class Foo {
public:
	Foo& operator=(const Foo& right_hand_operand);
};
~~~

- the ***destructor*** frees the resources used by an object and destroys the nonstatic data members of the object.
	- destructors are automatically called when things are destroyed:
		- variables are destroyed when they go out of scope.
		- members of an object are destroyed when the object of which they are a part is destroyed.
		- elements in a container—whether a library container or an array—are destroyed when the container is destroyed.
		- dynamically allocated objects are destroyed when the *delete* operator is applied to a pointer to the object.
		- temporary objects are destroyed at the end of the full expression in which the temporary was created.
		- **note that an object's destructor is not run when a reference or a pointer (to that object) goes out of scope (or is destroyed in general?).**
	- **the destructor runs its function body first, then <ins>implicitly</ins> performs memberwise destruction (calls destructors for class-type members, does nothing for built-in type members)**.
		- note that the implicit destruction of a built-in (raw) pointer does not delete the object to which that pointer points (we have to [clean up manually](https://github.com/tedklin/pseudoblog/blob/master/cpp_notebook/primer/ch-12.md#direct-memory-management)).
		- [smart pointers](https://github.com/tedklin/pseudoblog/blob/master/cpp_notebook/primer/ch-12.md) are class-type members that have their own destructors, so we don't have to worry about manually cleaning them up.
	- if not manually defined, the destructor is **always** synthesized.
		- the synthesized version is just a destructor with an empty body (memberwise destruction is always implicitly performed).
~~~
// example destructor declaration
class Foo {
public:
	~Foo();
};
~~~

- ***= default*** explicitly asks the compiler to generate the synthesized versions of the copy-control members (similar to = default for the default constructor).
- ***deleted functions*** are ones that are declared but cannot be used in any other way. (C++11)
	- defined with ***= delete***
	- specifically, we can use make the copy constructor and copy assignment operator deleted functions to prevent copies.
		- never make the destructor a deleted function unless for very good reason.
	- in general, if a class has any data member that cannot be default constructed, copied, assigned, or destroyed, then the corresponding member function will be synthesized as a deleted function.
		- in particular, note that if a class has a const or reference member, the synthesized copy-assignment operator will be implicitly defined as deleted.

### misc stuff in Primer
- *value-like* vs *pointer-like* classes.
- *swap* function and *copy-and-swap* technique for classes that allocate dynamic memory.

### misc conventions and tips
- [**rule of three/five/zero**](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/rule_of_three) to determine when classes need to define their own (non-synthesized) versions of copy-control members
	- for example, if a ("value-like") class needs to define a (non-synthesized) destructor (i.e. to free memory directly), it almost surely also needs to define a (non-synthesized) copy-assignment operator and copy constructor (to make sure copies don't all have raw pointers to the same object).
- the copy-assignment operator often does the same work as is needed in the copy constructor and destructor. in such cases, the common
work should be put in private utility functions.
- before C++11, similar effects to *deleted functions* were achieved by making the corresponding functions private.


## move semantics (13.6)

### main core ideas
- use cases of *move*:
	- when an object would be immediately destroyed after it is copied, moving would alternatively provide better performance.
		- i.e. [moving a shared_ptr for optimization](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/41871115/why-would-i-stdmove-an-stdshared-ptr)
	- classes (like *unique_ptr*) that exhibit "ownership" and don't share their resource need to be moved instead of copied.
		- move semantics in general are closely tied to the concept of ownership.
- ***rvalue references***
	- obtained by using && instead of & (for [lvalue reference](https://github.com/tedklin/pseudoblog/blob/master/cpp_notebook/primer/ch-02.md#compound-types-23)) as the type.
		- ***std::move*** function returns an rvalue reference to its given (lvalue) object.
			- tells the compiler that we have an lvalue that we want to treat as if it were an rvalue.
			- **std::move essentially promises the compiler that we do not intend to use the moved-from object (lvalue) again in any way except to assign to it or to destroy it.**
				- **this is a dangerous operation, so use it judiciously!**
	- rvalue references may be bound only to an object that is about to be destroyed (literals, the results of certain expressions, anything that is not an [lvalue](https://github.com/tedklin/pseudoblog/blob/master/cpp_notebook/primer/ch-04.md#chapter-4-expressions)).
		- this is the opposite of the binding rules for [plain lvalue references](https://github.com/tedklin/pseudoblog/blob/master/cpp_notebook/primer/ch-02.md#compound-types-23) and more like the binding rules for [lvalue references to const](https://github.com/tedklin/pseudoblog/blob/master/cpp_notebook/primer/ch-02.md#const-qualifier-24).
		- note that **all** variables are lvalues, even variables that have rvalue reference type.
	- because rvalue references can only be bound to temporaries, we know that the referred-to object is about to be destroyed and there can be no other users of that object.
		- as a result, we are free to “move” resources from an rvalue reference to another object.
		- we can also think of this as we can "steal" or "take over" resources from an object bound to an rvalue reference.
~~~
// examples of legal rvalue reference bindings
int &&rr1 = 42;
int &&rr2 = i * 42;
int &&rr3 = std::move(rr1);
~~~
- to enable move operations for our own types, we define the move copy-control members: **move constructor** and **move-assignment operator**. 
	- these members are similar to the corresponding copy operations (see above), but they “steal” resources from their given object rather than copy them.
	- move copy-control members that are not expected to throw exceptions should be marked as ***noexcept*** (after the parameter list).
	- **after a move operation, the “moved-from” object must remain a *valid* (including assignable) and *destructible* object. users may make no assumptions about its value (and shouldn't use it any way other than to assign to it or destroy it).**
		- move copy-control members must ensure that the moved-from object is left in a state such that destroying that object will be harmless.
			- i.e. setting the moved-from object's raw pointers to nullptr, so destroying the moved-from object won't also destroy the resources that it just handed over to the moved-to object.
	- with move copy-control, rvalues are moved and lvalues are copied.
		- if a class has a usable copy constructor and no move constructor, objects that you try to "move" will use the copy constructor instead. (similarly for the copy-assignment operator and move-assignment)
	- the compiler will synthesize a move constructor or a move-assignment operator only if the class doesn’t define any of its own copy-control members AND if every nonstatic data member of the class can be moved (built-in types or move-operation-enabled class types).
		- classes that define a move constructor or move-assignment operator must also define their own copy operations.
		- remember the rule of three/five/zero!s
~~~
class Foo {
	// example move copy constructor declaration
	Foo(Foo&& foo) noexcept;
	
	// example move copy-assignment declaration
	Foo& operator=(Foo&& rhs) noexcept;
};
~~~

### misc conventions and tips
- Because a moved-from object has indeterminate state, calling std::move on an object is a dangerous operation. When we call move, we must be absolutely certain that there can be no other users of the moved-from object.
	- Judiciously used inside class code, move can offer significant performance benefits. Casually used in ordinary user code (as opposed to class implementation code), moving an object is more likely to lead to mysterious and hard-to-find bugs than to any improvement in the performance of the application.
	- Outside of class implementation code such as move constructors or move-assignment operators, use std::move only when you are certain that you need to do a move and that the move is guaranteed to be safe.
- again, [**rule of three/five/zero**](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/rule_of_three) to determine when classes need to define their own (non-synthesized) versions of copy-control members
- [different value category terminology (lvalue, rvalue, xvalue, etc.)](https://github.com/tedklin/pseudoblog/blob/master/cpp_notebook/primer/ch-04.md#chapter-4-expressions)
- when to use move operations
	- [see second answer here](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/3413470/what-is-stdmove-and-when-should-it-be-used)
	- [pass-by-value-and-std::move vs pass-by-reference for constructors](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/51705967/advantages-of-pass-by-value-and-stdmove-over-pass-by-reference)
	- [move semantics vs smart pointers](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/44275222/compare-the-habits-between-move-and-smart-pointer-in-c)
- [some other considerations for when to define move constructors and assignments for our own types (read all answers!)](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/11077103/when-to-use-move-constructors-assignments)
