# chapter 15: object-oriented programming

## defining base and derived classes (15.1 + 15.2)

### main core ideas 

~~~
// BulkQuote is a derived class from Quote with public inheritance
class BulkQuote : public Quote { 
public:
	// delegating constructor to initialize base subobject part
	BulkQuote(const std::string& book, double p, std::size_t qty, double disc) :
		Quote(book, p), min_qty(qty), discount(disc) { }

	// explicitly signal that NetPrice intends to override virtual NetPrice in Quote
	double NetPrice(std::size_t) const override;
};
~~~

- the base class defines as ***virtual*** those functions it expects its derived classes to define for themselves.
	- the *virtual* keyword appears only on the declaration inside the class and may not be used on a function definition that appears outside the class body.
	- **classes used as the root of an inheritance hierarchy almost always define a virtual destructor** even if they do no work or *=default*.
- each class controls access to its own members.
	- ***protected*** access specifier in a base class lets (only) derived classes access those members.
	- [public, protected, and private inheritance](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/860339/difference-between-private-public-and-protected-inheritance)
	- details on access control in Primer 15.5
- a derived object conceptually contains multiple parts: a *subobject* containing the (nonstatic) members defined in the derived class itself, plus subobjects corresponding to each base class from which the derived class inherits.
	- **a derived class' constructor must use a (direct) base-class constructor to initialize its (direct) base-class part** (recall [delegating constructors](https://github.com/tedklin/pseudoblog/blob/master/cpp_notebook/primer/ch-07.md#constructors)).
		- or can "inherit" a constructor from its base class with a *using* declaration, which automatically generates code to do this for us!
	- in general, interactions with an object of a class-type should use the interface of that class, even if that object is the base-class (subobject) part of a derived object.
- if a base class defines a [static member](https://github.com/tedklin/pseudoblog/blob/master/cpp_notebook/primer/ch-07.md#static-class-members), there is only one such member defined for the entire hierarchy.
	- we can use a static member (that's accessible) through either the base or derived class / object.
- a class must be defined, not just declared, before we can use it as a base class.
- we can prevent a class from being used as a base by following the class name with *final*.


## inheritance conversions and virtual functions (15.2.3 + 15.3 + 15.4)

### main core ideas
- (when dealing with references and pointers) there is an automatic conversion from a derived class to its base class, but there is no automatic conversion from the base class to its derived class(s).
	- the compiler has no guarantee that an object declared with base type is actually a derived type (unless we cast).
- there is no automatic derived-to-base conversion between objects themselves, but appropriately defined [copy constructors and copy assign operators](https://github.com/tedklin/pseudoblog/blob/master/cpp_notebook/primer/ch-13.md) (whose parameters are usually reference to const) can create similar behavior. 
	- base class constructors don't know about data members specific to only the derived class, so data members in common get copied and derived-class-specific data members get ignored or "sliced down".
- the ***static type*** of a pointer or reference to a base class may differ from its ***dynamic type***.
	- static type is known at compile time and is the type that an object is declared with.
	- dynamic type may not be known until runtime and is the type that an object actually represents in memory.
- we can *bind* a pointer or reference to a base-class type *to* an object of a type derived from that base class.
- ***dynamic binding*** (or *runtime binding*) happens when a virtual function is called through a reference (or a pointer) to a base class.
	- at runtime, the compiler decides which virtual function to use based on the dynamic type of the object bound to that pointer or reference.
	- **virtuals are resolved at runtime only if the call is made through a reference or pointer. only in these cases is it possible for an object’s dynamic type to differ from its static type.**
	- nonvirtual member functions and virtuals that aren't called through a reference/pointer are resolved at compile time.
- we can specify the keyword ***override*** on a virtual function in a derived class to clearly signal our intention to both readers and the compiler.
	- we can specify the keyword *final* to signal that a function can't be overriden.
- virtual functions that have default arguments should use the same argument values in the base and derived classes.
	- default arguments are always resolved to those defined in the static (which is usually the base) type.
- we can specify that a virtual function is a ***pure virtual*** by writing *= 0* in place of a function body.
	- pure virtuals don't have to be defined / implemented.
	- a pure virtual makes a class an ***abstract base class***.
		- we can't directly create objects of a type that is an abstract base class.

## class scope under inheritance (15.6)

### main core ideas
- the scope of a derived class nests inside the scope of its base classes.
	- allows the members of a derived class to use members of its base class as if those members were part of the derived class.
- the scope operator :: can be used to explicitly circumvent the virtual mechanism (but should generally avoid this by not reusing names).
