# chapter 2: variables and basic types

## primitive built-in types (2.1)

### new core ideas
- arithmetic types
- conversion rules
	- *bool* <-> non*bool*
		- zero is false, nonzero is true.
	- floating-point <-> integral
		- truncate / add fractional part of zero.
	- assigning out-of-range
		- unsigned types wrap around, signed types become undefined.
- literals
	- escape sequences
	- can specify types of literals with prefixes or suffixes. common ones are:
		- *u* suffix for unsigned integer, *f* suffix for float

~~~
// integer literals (default to smallest type it fits from int, long, or long long)
20 // decimal, defaults to signed
024 // octal
0x14 // hexadecimal
~~~	

~~~
// floating point literals (default to type double)
3.14
3.14E0 or 3.14e0 // scientific notation
0.
.001
~~~


### misc conventions and tips
- unless you need to get close to hardware, here are general rules of thumb for arithmetic types (justifications in section 2.1.1):
	- use an ***unsigned*** type prefix when you know that the values **cannot** be negative.
		- *unsigned* by itself is an abbreviation for *unsigned int*.
	- use ***int*** for integer arithmetic. if you need larger integers, use *long long*.
	- use ***double*** for floating-point computations.
	- **don't use plain *char* or *bool* in arithmetic expressions**. use them only to hold characters or truth values. if you really need a tiny integer, explicitly specify *signed char* or *unsigned char*.
	- **avoid undefined and implementation-defined behavior**, for example:
		- **don't assign an out-of-range value to an object of signed type.**
		- **don't mix signed and unsigned types.**
		- **don't assume that the size of an int is a fixed and known value.**
- two string literals that appear adjacent to one another and that are separated by only spaces, tabs, or newlines are automatically concatenated into a single literal.
	- useful for writing string literal that's too large to fit comfortably on a single line
- [an example use case of literal suffix](http://www.cplusplus.com/forum/beginner/106449/#msg576166)


## variables (2.2)

### new core ideas
- initialization
	- **initialization is not assignment**, even though they both use the = symbol. 
		- initialization happens when a variable is given a value when it is created.
		- assignment obliterates an object's current value and replaces that value with a new one.
		- an example of the distinction: reference types or types with top-level const (see sections below) can only be *initialized*, not *assigned*.
	- ***default initialization***
		- happens when:
			- nonstatic variables are defined without an explicit initializer at block scope (inside any brackets).
			- members of a class are not explicitly initialized with an in-class initializer or in a constructor initializer list.
		- **built-in type variables (including arrays) are default initialized to *undefined* value.**
			- defined outside any function body are initialized to zero.
		- [classes use default constructors to control how objects of that class type are default initialized and value initialized.](https://github.com/tedklin/pseudoblog/blob/master/cpp/primer/ch-07.md#constructors)
			- **classes without a default constructor (meaning not even a synthesized default constructor) don't allow default initialization or value initialization at all**, but most classes have default constructors that let us safely define objects without explicit initializers.
				- for example, *std::string* uses its default constructor to default initialize to empty string no matter where it's defined.
	- ***value initialization***
		- &ast;NOTE: i'm not sure about *all* technical details about when value initialization happens, most information here is from other chapters.
		- happens when:
			- we define a [local *static* object](https://github.com/tedklin/pseudoblog/blob/master/cpp/primer/ch-06.md#basics-61) without an initializer.
			- we specify a dimension but use an empty list initializer for [built-in arrays](https://github.com/tedklin/pseudoblog/blob/master/cpp/primer/ch-03.md#built-in-arrays-35).
				- note that a built-in array itself will still be *default initialized* if we don't provide an initializer at all!
			- we only supply a size to a container like a [vector](https://github.com/tedklin/pseudoblog/blob/master/cpp/primer/ch-03.md#library-vector-type-33) to be initialized.
		-  the library implicitly creates a value-initialized element initializer for each element:
			- **uses zero for built-in types.**
			- **uses the default constructor for class types**, see bolded note above.
			- for built-in arrays, each element is then value initialized. (think a vector of arrays where each array will be value initialized. when an array itself is value initialized, its elements are also value intialized)
				- note: not really sure if my interpretation is correct on this one?
	- ***list initialization*** (C++11)
		- braced lists of initializers can be used.
		- the compiler will not let us *list initialize* variables of built-in type if the initializer might lead to the loss of information. (*int* type object can't be list-initialized with a *long double* initializer)
		- note that if we use a braced list initializer, but there is no way for the compiler to use the initializers to list initialize the object, the compiler would then try to use those initializers to directly construct the object (as if they were inside parentheses).
			- **ensure that braced list initializers actually perform list initialization!** (when that is our goal)
	- ***direct initialization***
		- happens when we define variables using parentheses (or braces for list initialization) without an = sign.
			- examples with [strings](https://github.com/tedklin/pseudoblog/blob/master/cpp/primer/ch-03.md#library-string-type-32) and [vectors](https://github.com/tedklin/pseudoblog/blob/master/cpp/primer/ch-03.md#library-vector-type-33).
		- directly function-matches with defined class [constructors](https://github.com/tedklin/pseudoblog/blob/master/cpp/primer/ch-07.md#constructors).
			- note that you can directly match with the copy constructor as well, so copy constructors aren't only used for copy initialization.
		- **stick with this form of initialization when defining variables!** however, keep in mind [they can lead to the "most vexing parse" disambiguity problem.](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/direct_initialization).
	- ***copy initialization***
		- happens when:
			- we define variables using an = sign (and a single operand).
			- pass an object as an argument to a parameter of nonreference type (pass by value).
			- return an object from a function that has a nonreference return type (return by value).
		- when we use copy initialization, we are asking the compiler to copy the right-hand operand into the object being created, converting that right-hand operand if necessary.
			- for class-types, the conversion depends on the existence of a corresponding [implicit class-type conversion](https://github.com/tedklin/pseudoblog/blob/master/cpp/primer/ch-07.md#additional-class-features).
		- for class-types, the copying itself (after the conversion if there is one) is defined by the [copy constructor](https://github.com/tedklin/pseudoblog/blob/master/cpp/primer/ch-13.md#copy-assign-destroy-131) or [move constructor]().
			- note that during copy initialization, the compiler is permitted to (but does not always) perform an optimization that skips the copy/move constructor and uses direct initialization instead (see *[copy elision](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/12953127/what-are-copy-elision-and-return-value-optimization)* explanation).
				- however, the copy constructor must exist and be accessible for this optimization to even have a chance at happening.
				- Primer mentions possible case of this happening when there is an implicit class-type conversion for the initializer.
- declaration vs definition
	- **variables must be defined exactly once but can be declared multiple times.**
	- *extern* keyword declares but does not define.
	- to use the same variable in multiple files, we must define that variable in one file. other files that use that variable must declare, but not define, that variable.
	
~~~
extern int i; // declares but does not define i
int j; // declares and defines j
extern double pi = 3.14; // defines pi (overriding extern keyword)
~~~

- rules for identifiers (variable names)

### misc conventions and tips
- **initialize every object of built-in type!**
	- uninitialized variables cause runtime problems!
- define variables close to where they're first used.
- **avoid defining a local variable with the same name as a global variable that the function uses or might use.**
	- the :: scope operator can override default scoping rules, but again, try to avoid this.


## compound types (2.3)

### new core ideas
- base type vs declarator
	- in the following example, *int* is the base type.
	- i, *p, and &r are declarators.
	- 1024, &i, and i are initializers.

~~~
int i = 1024, *p = &i, &r = i;
~~~

- an (*lvalue*) **reference** (signified by a *declarator* with the *&* type modifier) refers to (is another name for) its initializer.
	- refers to a single object (its initializer) throughout its lifetime.
		- references may only be bound to an object, not to a literal or a more general expression (exception: reference to const and classes related by inheritance).
		- the type of the reference and the object to which it is bound must match exactly (exception: reference to const and classes related by inheritance).
		- references must be initialized.
	- *all* operations on a reference are actually operations on the object to which the reference is bound.
	- references are not objects themselves.
	- see next section for reference to const, and see [here](https://github.com/tedklin/pseudoblog/blob/master/cpp/primer/ch-13.md#move-semantics-136) for a completely different type of reference called an rvalue reference.
- a **pointer** (signified by a *declarator* with the * type modifier) points to another type.
	- a pointer is an object in its own right, unlike a reference.
	- a pointer holds the address of another object.
		- **address-of operator &**
		- the type of the pointer and the object to which it points to must match exactly (exception: pointer to const and classes related by inheritance).
	- the **dereference operator &ast;** yields the object that a pointer points to.
		- can only be used on a valid pointer that points to an object.
- pointer usage
	- a *valid* pointer is one that:
		- points to an object
		- points to the location just immediately past the end of an object
		- is a null pointer
	- we can initialize a pointer as a null pointer using the literal *nullptr* (C++11) or the literal 0.
	- we can use valid pointers in conditions
		- null pointers evaluate to false
		- nonzero pointers evaluate to true
	- a *void** pointers can hold the address of an object of any type, but cannot be dereferenced (we don't know the object's type).
		- deals with memory as memory.
- references to pointers, pointers to pointers

### misc conventions and tips
- **the & and * symbols used in declarations have nothing to do with the & (address-of) and * (dereference) operators.**
	- think of them as completely different symbols!
- **read declarations from right to left.**
- older programs might use a preprocessor variable named *NULL* from *cstdlib* to initialize a null pointer.
	- modern c++ should use *nullptr* instead.
- **initialize all pointers!**
	- ***common theme: uninitialized variables cause undefined behavior!***
	- if possible, define a pointer only after the object to which it should point has been defined. otherwise initialize as *nullptr*.
- style choice for type modifiers in declarations:

~~~
// confusing
int* p1, p2; // p1 is a pointer to int, p2 is an int!
~~~

~~~
// good
int *p1, *p2; // both p1 and p2 are pointers to int
~~~

~~~
// good
int* p1; // p1 is a pointer to int
int* p2; // p2 is a pointer to int
~~~


## *const* qualifier (2.4)

### new core ideas
- *const*-ness of a variable only matters for operations that might change it.
- **by default, const objects are local to a file.**
	- when we define a const with the same name in multiple files, it is as if we had written definitions for separate variables in each file
	- to define a single instance of a const variable across multiple files, use the *extern* keyword on both its definition and declaration(s).

~~~
// file 1.cc
extern const int bufSize = fcn(); // defines and initializes a const that is accessible to other files
~~~

~~~
// file_1.h
extern const int bufSize; // same bufSize as defined in file_1.cc
~~~
	
**using the *const* qualifier with compound types:**

~~~
int i = 42;
const int &r1 = i; // reference to object of type const int
~~~
- ***reference to const* just means we can't use that reference to modify the object to which the reference is bound.**
	- whether a reference refers to a const or nonconst type affects what we can do with that reference, not whether we can alter the binding of the reference itself (we can't alter the binding of any reference). 
	- const objects require the use of references to const, but references to const are not limited to use with const objects.
- we can bind a *reference to const* to any expression that can be *converted* to the type of the reference, including:
	- a **nonconst** object, a literal, or a more general expression.
		- behind the scenes: unnamed **temporary objects** are created by compiler to store results from evaluating expressions / conversions.
		- **this means references to const can be bound to a temporary ([rvalue](https://github.com/tedklin/pseudoblog/blob/master/cpp/primer/ch-04.md#chapter-4-expressions)), in which case [the temporary's lifetime is prolonged.](https://herbsutter.com/2008/01/01/gotw-88-a-candidate-for-the-most-important-const/)**
			- note this doesn't work for plain references (would result in a compiler error or worse, a dangling reference).

~~~
double dval = 3.14;
const double *cptr = &dval; // pointer to object of type const double
~~~
- ***pointers to const*** have the same general idea as references to const.
	- we can store the address of a const object only in a pointer to const.
	- but we can also use a pointer to const to point to a **nonconst** object that otherwise has the same type.
	- **defining a pointer as a pointer to const affects only what we can do with the pointer.**
	- **important to remember that there is no guarantee that an object pointed to by a *pointer to const* won't change by other means.**

~~~
int errNumb = 0;
int *const currErr = &errNumb; // const pointer to object of type int

const double pi = 3.14;
const double *const pip = &pi; // const pointer to object of type const double
~~~
- because pointers are objects, we can have a pointer that is itself const.
- ***const pointers*** are pointers that can't change what they're pointing to after initialization. (same behavior as any const object)
- **the fact that a pointer is itself const says nothing about whether we can use the pointer to change the underlying object.**
- ***top-level const*** vs ***low-level const***
	- top-level const indicates that an object itself is const. it is ignored when we copy an object.
	- low-level const indicates that a pointer or reference points/refers to a const (appears in the base type of compound types). 
		- low-level const is never ignored.
		- when we copy a reference/pointer, both operands must have the same low-level const qualification or the copied object (right side operand) must be able to convert to the left side's low-level const qualification.
			- we can convert a low-level nonconst to a low-level const but not the other way around.
			- note to self (idk if this is technically correct lol) think of low-level const as a restriction that we can add but not remove to make the right side match the type of the left side.
	
***constant expressions***

- **constant expressions are expressions whose values cannot change and that can be evaluated at compile time.**
	- can be a literal or a const object that is initialized from a constant expression.
	- we can have [functions that are constant expressions](https://github.com/tedklin/pseudoblog/blob/master/cpp/primer/ch-06.md#other-features-65) that can also be used as constant expression initializers.
- we can ask the compiler to verify that an object's initializer is a constant expression by using the ***constexpr*** keyword in the object's declaration. (C++11)
	- can only use for literal types (arithmetic types, references, and pointers).
	- *constexpr* imposes a top-level const, so order of declaration in some compound-type cases would look different from previous rules.
		- refer to Primer for details.

### misc conventions and tips
- https://isocpp.org/wiki/faq/const-correctness
- **read declarations from right to left!**
- generally a good idea to use *constexpr* for variables that you intend to use as constant expressions.


## dealing with types (2.5)

### new core ideas
- type aliases
	- can be declared with the *typedef* keyword (old) or ***alias declaration* with the *using* keyword** (C++11)
	- after being defined, type aliases can appear wherever a type name can appear
	- can be tricky with pointers
- ***auto*** type specifier (C++11)
	- let compiler deduce the type for us from the initializer.
	- *auto* doesn't capture reference types and top-level consts. if we want the deduced type to be a reference type or have a top-level const, we must say so explicitly (in addition to the auto keyword).
		- note: not 100% sure about this.
	- & (address-of) of an int object has deduced type int*
	- refer to Primer for complete rules and examples.
- ***decltype*** type specifier (C++11)
	- returns the type of its operand (gives the same type as the type that would've been returned by the expression inside the operand).
	- refer to Primer for complete rules and examples.
	

## introductory data structure creation (2.6)

### new core ideas
- header files as interface, source files as implementation.
- the **preprocessor** runs before the compiler. 
	- it replaces *#include* directives with the contents of the specified *header* and follows other directives as well.
	- **header guards** are used by the preprocessor to protect against multiple inclusion.
		- *#define* directive takes a name and defines that name as a preprocessor variable.
		- *#ifdef* and *#ifndef* test whether a given preprocessor variable has been defined or not.
		- *#endif* closes *#ifdef* or *#ifndef*.
- whenever a header is updated, the source files that use that header must be recompiled to get the new or changed declarations.
		
~~~
// Sales_data.h

#ifndef SALES_DATA_H
#define SALES_DATA_H
#include <string>
struct Sales_data {
	// class stuff
};
#endif
~~~

### misc conventions and tips
- **headers should have guards!**
	- preprocessor variables must be unique throughout the program. ensure uniqueness by basing the variable name on the name of the class in the header.
		- Sales_data.h -> SALES_DATA_H
		

## ch2 things to follow up on
- what does it mean to be a pointer "one location past the end of an object"
	- answer: see iterators and array pointers (ch3)
- if you bind a reference to const to a nonconst object, then change the nonconst object directly, does the reference to const also change when you next use it? my intuition says yes, but the temporary object concept says no.
