# chapter 16: templates and generic programming

## defining a template (16.1)

### main core ideas
- *typename* and *class* keywords are interchangeable in the context of template **type parameters** (but prefer *typename*).
	- a type parameter can be used to name the return type or a function parameter type, and for variable declarations or casts inside the function body.
- **nontype parameters** may be an integral type, or a pointer or (lvalue) reference to an object or to a function type.
	- arguments bound to integral parameters must be constant expressions.
	- arguments bound to a pointer or reference parameter must have static lifetime.
- the compiler generates a class/function from a template when we instantiate a specific instance of the template (when we pass in a set of template arguments that hadn't been generated before).
	- helpful to remember that a type generated from a template includes the template's specific arguments.
	- each instantiation of a template class has its own instance of static members.
- it is up to the caller to guarantee that the arguments passed to the template support any operations that template uses (i.e. comparison operators), and that those operations behave correctly in the context in which the template uses them.
- function templates may deduce the template parameter type(s), but we must explicitly pass in arguments for class templates.
- **fully define templates in header files!** (as opposed to separating into header and source files for nontemplates)
	- [isocpp explanation](https://isocpp.org/wiki/faq/templates#templates-defn-vs-decl)
	- can define member functions and [should define static members outside](https://github.com/tedklin/pseudoblog/blob/master/cpp/primer/ch-07.md#static-class-members) the class template body (still inside the header file), but the definition will need to start with the keyword *template < parameter list here >*.
- by default, a member of an instantiated class template is instantiated only if the member is used.
- inside the scope of the class template itself, we may use the name of the template without the template arguments.
- if we want to use a type member *of* a template parameter, we must explicitly tell the compiler that the name is a type by using the *typename* keyword (otherwise the compiler will think the member is a data member).
- template parameters follow normal parameter scoping rules and default argument rules.

### other stuff in Primer:
- class friendship (one-to-one, general, specific)
- template type aliases (for specific instances of templates and for general)
- member templates (pretty much intuitive, useful for stuff like container constructors that take any kind of iterator)
- *explicit instantiation* to avoid overhead of instantiating the same template in multiple files
- case study of *shared_ptr* template design

## template argument deduction (16.2)

### main core ideas
- const conversions and array/function to pointer are the only automatic conversions for arguments to template parameters for functions (no arithmetic or user-defined implicit conversions).
